# vi-101

Real simple guide to the most important stuff with `vi` editor and questions commonly asked

* [I cannot type anything!](#i-cannot-type-anything)
* [I cannot exit vi](#i-cannot-exit-vi)
* [Most useful normal mode commands](#most-useful-normal-mode-commands)
    * [Files](#files)
    * [Editing](#editing)
* [Suggested settings for YAML editing](#suggested-settings-for-yaml-editing)

# I cannot type anything!

Probably the first time you've used `vi` right? When you start the editor, it is in what is known as `normal` mode, which is a command entry mode. Certain keystrokes will be interpreted as commands, others may be ignored. What won't be happening is text is being typed into the editor.

To begin editing, you must enter `insert` mode, by typing `i`. If you've typed some other keys in confusion, this may not work immediately. Press `ESC` then press `i`. The bottom line of the editor should read `--INSERT--`. Now you can edit stuff.

# I cannot exit vi

Some possibilities.

1. You are not in `normal` mode.

    You need to be in `normal` mode to execute any of the commands to exit the editor.
    If it says `INSERT`, `VISUAL` or anything like that at the bottom of the screen, press `ESC` until it no longer does.

    Then you should be able to press `:` and see it come up at the bottom of the screen, so you're able to enter something like `wq`

1. You are editing a read-only file.

    You get a message like `E505 "file" is read only (add ! to override)` when you try `:wq`.

    The message is encouraging you to do `:wq!` to force overwrite of a read-only file, but if that file belongs to root and you are not root, then this isn't going to work and you'll get the same error. The only way to exit in this case is to exit *without* saving, which is `:q!`. For root owned files, you must use `sudo`, e.g.

    ```
    sudo vi /etc/hosts
    ```

    Note that in Kubernetes labs, you are already the root user so you'll never need `sudo`. In Linux labs, you are never the root user when the lab starts, and you'll need `sudo` a lot!

# Most useful normal mode commands

All the following work in `normal` mode. As soon as you enter insert mode, you need to press `ESC` before any of the following will work again.

## Files

* Saving without exiting

    * `:w` - When editing Kubernetes YAML in the exam, do this and run `kubectl apply` in another terminal window. Saves you going in and out the editor if you have syntax errors. Only quit `vi` once `kubectl` is successful.

* Exit without saving

    * `:q!`

* Exit and save

    Both these commands achieve the same thing.
    1. `:wq`
    1. `:x`

* Pasting from documentation

    * `:set paste` - Turn on paste mode. Then hit `i` for insert mode. It will say `INSERT (paste)`
    * `:set nopaste` - Turn off paste mode. Do this immediately after pasting from documentation.

## Editing

* `i` - Enter insert mode at cursor position
* `SHIFT - A` - Enter insert mode at end of current line
* `y` - Yank (copy) current line to vi internal buffer (not desktop clipboard)
* `p` - Paste from vi internal buffer. It will paste _below_ not _at_ the line the cursor is on.
* `dd` - Delete (cut) line under cursor. (`2dd` next 2 lines, `5dd` next 5 lines etc.). Lines removed this way are placed in vi internal buffer, i.e. can be pasted.
* `u` - Undo last edit (`2u` last 2 edits etc.)
* `SHIFT + D` - Delete from cursor to end of line
* `gg` - Go to top of file
* `SHIFT + G` - Go to last line in file
* `>` - Indent current line one tab stop. (`.` indent again)
* `<` - Outdent current line one tab stop. (`.` outdent again)
* `SHIFT + V` - Enter visual line mode. You can select multiple lines of text and perform operations like `dd`, `y`, `>`, `<` on the selected lines

# Suggested settings for YAML editing

Create a file `~/.vimrc` and add the following lines to it.

```shell
set nu
set sw=2
set et
set ts=2
set ai
```

What these do, in order:

1. Enable line numbers
2. Set shift width 2 chars

    Note: May already be configured on exam terminal

3. Expand tabs to spaces

    Note: May already be configured on exam terminal

4. Set tab stop to 2 chars

    Note: May already be configured on exam terminal

5. Enable auto indent




[Return to main FAQ](../README.md)